>> Woodruff: THE DEADLINE LOOMS,
IN THE FINAL PUSH FOR HEALTH
INSURANCE SIGN-UPS BEFORE
SUNDAY, WE TAKE A LOOK AT
A.C.A.'S SECOND SEASON.
MILES O'BRIEN REPORTS ON HOW
BREAKTHROUGHS IN SENSORY
PERCEPTION ARE HELPING AMPUTEES
FEEL AGAIN.
>> FOR A LONG TIME PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN TRYING TO BUILD ROBOTS THAT
TRY TO EMULATE HUMANS.
NOW THERE'S A WAY WE CAN
DIRECTLY IMPACT SOMEONE'S
QUALITY OF LIFE BY BUILDING A
ROBOT THAT BECOMES PART OF
SOMEONE'S BODY.
>> Woodruff: THEN, AN INTIMATE
LOOK AT EDWARD SNOWDEN.
WITH THE JOURNALISTS BEHIND THE
OSCAR NOMINATED DOCUMENTARY
"CITIZEN FOUR," WHICH TAKES
VIEWERS INSIDE THE FIRST DAYS OF
ONE OF THE BIGGEST INTELLIGENCE
LEAKS IN U.S. HISTORY.
>> WE DIDN'T MANUFACTURE THE
KIND OF THRILLER ASPECTS TO IT.
THAT ACTUALLY CAME WITH THE
STORY.
I STARTED RECEIVING ANONYMOUS
E-MAILS FROM A STRANGER MAKING
CLAIMS OF MASS GOVERNMENT
SURVEILLANCE, YOU KNOW, AND THEN
WE MET IN CONGRESS HONG.
-- HONG KONG.
>> Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY,
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
ARE HERE, TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE STORIES
WE'RE COVERING ON TONIGHT'S "PBS
NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: A POLITICAL DRAMA
THAT'S GRIPPED THE STATE OF
OREGON CAME TO AN ABRUPT END
TODAY.
LONG-TIME GOVERNOR JOHN
KITZHABER ANNOUNCED HE'S
RESIGNING OVER ALLEGATIONS OF
INFLUENCE PEDDLING BY HIS
FIANCEE.
IN AN AUDIO STATEMENT, THE
VETERAN DEMOCRAT SAID HE BROKE
NO LAWS.
>> Woodruff: HARD-HIT NEW
ENGLAND IS BRACING FOR BLIZZARD
CONDITIONS AND BRUTAL COLD,
AGAIN.
A POWERFUL, WEEKEND STORM COULD
DROP TWO FEET OF SNOW IN COASTAL
MAINE, AND BLAST THE REGION WITH
70 MILE-AN-HOUR WINDS.
IN BOSTON TODAY, CREWS KEPT
WORKING AROUND THE CLOCK TO
REMOVE SIX FEET OF SNOW FROM
THREE EARLIER STORMS.
PLOWS ARE ALSO BEING BROUGHT IN
FROM OTHER STATES.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TODAY CONDEMNED
THE KILLINGS OF THREE YOUNG
MUSLIMS IN NORTH CAROLINA AS
"BRUTAL AND OUTRAGEOUS."
THEY WERE SHOT DEAD BY A
NEIGHBOR, IN CHAPEL HILL.
POLICE CITED A PARKING DISPUTE,
BUT THE VICTIMS' FAMILIES CALLED
IT A HATE CRIME.
IN HIS STATEMENT, THE PRESIDENT
SAID:
HE SAID THE F.B.I. IS CHECKING
WHETHER  FEDERAL LAWS WERE
BROKEN.
ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS IN IRAQ
ATTACKED A MAJOR BASE TODAY
WHERE 400 U.S. MARINES AND OTHER
TROOPS ARE TRAINING IRAQIS.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAID THE
AMERICANS WERE NOT INVOLVED.
INSTEAD, IRAQI TROOPS KILLED
MOST OF THE ATTACKERS AT THE
SPRAWLING AL-ASAD AIR BASE IN
ANBAR PROVINCE, WEST OF BAGHDAD.
IN WASHINGTON, A PENTAGON
SPOKESMAN SAID THE ASSAULT
INVOLVED 20 TO 25 FIGHTERS.
>> EARLY INDICATIONS ARE THAT
YES, SOME OF THEM DID DETONATE
THEIR VEST, DETONATE THEMSELVES.
AND THEN THEY WERE FOLLOWED BY
ROUGHLY SOMETHING ON THE ORDER
OF 15 OR SO OTHER FIGHTERS.
IT DOES APPEAR NOW THAT MOST IF
NOT ALL OF THEM WERE WEARING
IRAQI UNIFORMS.
>> Woodruff: AT THE SAME TIME,
THE MILITANTS HAVE SEIZED
CONTROL OF A NEARBY TOWN.
IN PAKISTAN, TALIBAN MILITANTS
STORMED A SHIITE MOSQUE DURING
FRIDAY PRAYERS, AND BY THE TIME
IT WAS OVER, 20 PEOPLE WERE
DEAD.
ANOTHER 45 WERE WOUNDED IN THE
8ATTACK IN PESHAWAR, IN THE
NORTHWESTERN PART OF THE
COUNTRY.
ONE OF THE MILITANTS BLEW
HIMSELF UP TO CREATE A DIVERSION
FOR THE OTHERS.
THE PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS IN
UKRAINE MADE A NEW PUSH FOR
TERRITORY TODAY, BEFORE A TRUCE
TAKES HOLD.
ALEX THOMSON OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS IS IN THE REBEL-
HELD CITY OF DONETSK, AND FILED
THIS REPORT.
>> BECAUSE THE AGREEMENT SAID NO
CEASE FIRE TILL MIDNIGHT, HEAVY
FIGHTINGS CONTINUED ACROSS
EASTERN YIEWCIALG TODAY.
THE COUNTRY'S PRESIDENT PETRO
POROSHENKO VISITED TROOPS NEAR
KIEV AND TOLD THEM THERE IS A
LONG ROAD AHEAD.
>> ( translated ): I DON'T WANT
ANYONE TO HAVE ANY ILLUSIONS AND
SO I AM NOT SEEN AS NAIVE
PERSON.
WE ARE STILL A VERY LONG WAY
FROM PEACE.
NOBODY HAS A STRONG BELIEF THAT
THE PEACE CONDITIONS WHICH WERE
SIGNED IN MINSK WILL BE
IMPLEMENTED STRICTLY.
>> Reporter: THE EUROPEAN UNION
HAS CAUTIONED RUSSIA, IF THEY
IGNORE THE DEAL THEY COULD FACE
FURTHER SANCTIONS.
>> IN REBEL HELD STICKS ALMOST
ALL THE SHOPS ARE SHOT, THE
POWER SUPPLY INTERMITTENT AND
THE SOUND OF SHELLING EVERY DAY.
>> ALL OUR FRIENDS ARE PREPARING
THEIR BASEMENTS BECAUSE PEOPLE
ARE AFRAID.
THEY'RE TIRED FROM THE WAR.
NOBODY NEEDS THIS.
>> THERE IS NO ZONE IN DONETSK
ENTIRELY SAFE FROM THE DAILY
SHELLING.
SEVERAL PEOPLE ARE INJURED AND
KILLED WITH EVERY DAY THAT'S
PASSING, NOT STOPPING IN THE
RUNUP TO THE CEASE FIRE
SCHEDULED TO COME INTO FORCE
MIDNIGHT SATURDAY.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. STATE
DEPARTMENT CHARGED RUSSIA AND
THE REBELS ARE VIOLATING THE
SPIRIT OF THE PEACE AGREEMENT.
THERE ARE NEW SIGNS OF
IMPROVEMENT IN THE EURO-ZONE'S
ECONOMY.
GROWTH IN GERMANY, THE BLOC'S
LARGEST MEMBER, EXPANDED AT MORE
THAN DOUBLE THE EXPECTED RATE AT
THE END OF 2014.
SPAIN'S ECONOMY ALSO ACCELERATED
IN THE FOURTH QUARTER.
THE EUROPEAN REPORT, AND RISING
OIL PRICES, HELPED WALL STREET;
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 47 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
18,000 JUST SHORT OF A RECORD;
THE S-AND-P 500 DID REACH A NEW
HIGH, NEAR 2,100;
AND THE NASDAQ ROSE 36 ON THE
DAY;
FOR THE WEEK, ALL THREE INDEXES
WERE UP.
AND "NEW YORK TIMES" MEDIA
COLUMNIST DAVID CARR DIED LAST
NIGHT.
HE COLLAPSED IN HIS OFFICE, JUST
A FEW HOURS AFTER MODERATING AN
ONLINE CONVERSATION WITH EDWARD
SNOWDEN, THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY LEAKER.
CARR WAS WELL-KNOWN FOR POINTED
OBSERVATIONS ON MODERN MEDIA.
HE ALSO WROTE A MEMOIR ABOUT
BATTLING DRUG ADDICTION.
DAVID CARR WAS 58 YEARS OLD.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
WHAT TO KNOW BEFORE SUNDAY'S
HEALTH CARE DEADLINE;
HOW SENSORY TECHNOLOGY IS TAKING
PROSTHETIC LIMBS TO A NEW LEVEL;
AN INSIDE LOOK AT BOKO HARAM'S
CAMPAIGN OF TERROR IN NIGERIA;
A RARE GLIMPSE OF THE MAN BEHIND
THE N.S.A. LEAKS;
PLUS, SHIELDS AND BROOKS ON THE
WEEK'S NEWS.
>> Woodruff: SUNDAY MARKS THE
DEADLINE FOR ENROLLING IN THE
STATE AND FEDERAL HEALTH
EXCHANGES THIS YEAR.
THE PUSH IS ON ONCE AGAIN TO GET
PEOPLE TO SIGN UP.
THERE ARE SIGNS THAT PERHAPS
MORE THAN TEN MILLION WILL
ENROLL, LESS THAN INITIALLY
EXPECTED, BUT BETTER THAN A
REVISED ESTIMATE SHOWED.
TO FILL US IN ON THE LATEST,
WE'RE JOINED AGAIN BY
MARY AGNES CAREY OF KAISER
HEALTH NEWS.
AND SUSAN DENTZER, A HEALTH
ANALYST FOR THE NEWSHOUR.
GOOD TO SEE YOU BOTH AGAIN.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: TIME TO TALK
HEALTHCARE.
MARY AGNES CAREY, OVERALL, HOW
HAS THE PROCESS BEEN GOING THE
SECOND YEAR?
>> THE WEB SITE IS BETTER,
ACTUALLY WORKS, AND THAT'S
BETTER FOR EVERYONE TRYING TO
ENROLL.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SAID
RIGHT NOW WE'VE GOT ABOUT
10 MILLION PEOPLE WHO HAVE
ENROLLED AND PICKED A PLAN.
MOST OF THOSE PEOPLE, ABOUT
7.75 MILLION, WITH THE FEDERAL
EXCHANGES IN ABOUT 37 STATES AND
THE REST ARE FROM THE STATE'S
RUN EXCHANGES.
>> Woodruff: HOW MANY OF THESE
WHO ARE SIGNING UP ARE PEOPLE
WHO ARE RETURNING, WHO ARE PART
OF THE SYSTEM LAST YEAR, AND HOW
MANY ARE NEW?
>> 42% ARE NEW ENROLLEES AND 58%
ARE REENROLLED.
WHAT WE DON'T KNOW ABOUT THE 58%
THAT'S IMPORTANT, DID THEY
ACTIVELY REENROLL OR PICK A NEW
PLAN?
THAT'S IMPORTANT BECAUSE IF YOU
DIDN'T GO BACK AND EVALUATEHE
PRICE OF THE PLAN, THE SUBSIDY,
HOW MUCH IT COULD BUY, YOU COULD
END UP WITH A SUBSIDY THAT BUYS
LESS AND END UP IN A PLAN THAT
COSTS YOU MORE OR LESS, IF YOU
ARE AUTOMATICALLY REINVOLVED AND
DIDN'T ACTIVATE YOURSELF.
>> Woodruff: SO THOSE ARE
FACTORS BEING WATCHED.
>> ABSOLUTELY, WE'LL LEARN MORE
ABOUT IT LATER IN THE YEAR.
>> Woodruff: SOON, THE
EXPECTATION NUMBER SHIFTED.
IT WAS 10 MILLION, THEN LOWERED,
NOW LOOKS LIKE BETTER THAN THAT.
WHAT'S GOING ON?
>> IT IS THE FACT THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION WAS EXPECTING A
MAXIMUM OF 9.9 MILLION TO ENROLL
IN THE OPEN ENROLLMENT PERIOD
AND LOOKS LIKE WE OVERSHOT THAT.
LOOKS HIGHER THAN 10 MANAGER.
THAT'S LOWER THAN WHAT OTHERS
ESTIMATED INCLUDING THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
WHICH WAS ESTIMATING 12 MILLION
ENROLLEES.
BUT LOOKS LIKE WE'LL PROBABLY
COME IN ABOUT THE MIDDLE,
10 MILLION, 11 MILLION PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: ARE THEY
PINPOINTING WHAT THE CHALLENGES
STILL ARE OUT THERE?
>> FOR ONE THING, IT'S HARD TO
GET PEOPLE WHO HAVEN'T ALREADY
HAD COVERAGE TO SIGN UP.
WE KNOW THAT'S THE CASE.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE, FOR
EXAMPLE, WAS EXPECTING MORE
EMPLOYERS TO DROP COVERAGE AND
SEND THEIR WORKERS TO EXCHANGES
AND THAT HASN'T HAPPENED.
EMPLOYERS HAVE ACTUALLY STUCK
WITH THEIR COVERAGE.
SO THAT ACCOUNTS FOR THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
LOWERING ITS ESTIMATES ABOUT HOW
MANY PEOPLE WOULD BAY COVERAGE
THROUGH THE EXCHANGES.
>> Woodruff: YOU HAVE BEEN
LOOKING AT GENDER.
YOU'RE SEEING MORE WOMEN SIGNING
UP THAN MEN?
>> FASCINATING, SECOND YEAR
RUNNING, BY 10 PERCENTAGE
POINTS, MORE WOMEN ARE SIGNING
UP THAN MEN.
ABILITY 55% ENROLLEES ARE WOMEN,
45% ARE MEN.
WE DON'T HAVE ANY REASON TO
BELIEVE MORE WOMEN ARE UNINSURED
THAN MEN, SO WHAT EXPLAINS THIS?
NOBODY REALLY KNOWS.
PEOPLE FALL BACK ON EXPLANATIONS
THAT WOMEN CARE MORE ABOUT
HEALTH AND HEALTHCARE SOMETIMES
AND THEY ARE THE PRIMARY BUYERS
OF HEALTHCARE FOR THEIR
FAMILIES.
>> Woodruff: MORE SON
SENSUOUS?
>> WE SEE INTERESTINGLY OF
PEOPLE WHO GOT COVERED LAST YEAR
WHO ACTUALLY USED THEIR
COVERAGE, THE SIGNS ARE A LOT OF
THE PEOPLE WHO USED THEIR
COVERAGE WERE OLDER WOMEN WITH
CHRONIC ILLNESS.
SO THESE ARE WOMEN WHO REALLY
NEEDED COVERAGE AND THEY'RE
USING IT.
THEY'RE USING IT TO GET CARE FOR
CONDITIONS THAT THEY HAVE.
>> Woodruff: MARY AGNES CAREY,
YOU LOOKED ESPECIALLY AT LATINOS
AND HOW THE SIGNUP IS GOING
AMONG THAT GROUP.
WHAT THE DID YOU FIND?
>> THIS IS A KEY DEMOGRAPHIC FOR
THE HEALTH LAW, YOUNGER AND
HEALTHIER, AND THESE ARE THE
PEOPLE YOU WANT IN THE HISTIC
POOL.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES DECIDED TO DEVOTE
A THIRD OF ITS MEDIA BUDGET TO
LATINO OUTREACH AND ENROLLMENT
VERSUS 10% LAST YEAR BUT IT'S
STILL A ROUGH ROAD FOR A VARIETY
OF REASONS, LIKE MANY PEOPLE WHO
HAVEN'T HAD HEALTH INSURANCE
BEFORE, MANY LATINOS ARE
CONFUSED ABOUT THE PROCESS OF
DEDUCTIBLES AND CO-PACE AND SO
ON.
IN THE PAST, MANY LATINOS SAID
WE JUST PAID CASH.
EVEN WITEVEN WITH THE SUBSIDY, E
WONDERING IF IT'S WORTH
ENROLLING.
BUT MUCH FOCUS ON THIS
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP.
>> Woodruff: HANGING OUT WILL
I --THE TAX PENALTY IS OUT THERR
THOSE WHO DON'T SIGN UP.
IT'S GOING UP.
THAT'S ON THE ONE HAND.
ON THE OTHER HAND, WE'RE LOOKING
AT THE PROSPECT OF THE SUPREME
COURT LOOKING AT A SKYS THAT
COULD END UP WITH THE SUBSIDIES
MARY AGNES JUST MENTIONED BEING
DECLARED UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
HOW ARE PEOPLE, HOW ARE THE
EXPERTS DEALING WITH ALL THIS?
>> PEOPLE ARE FOCUSING ONTH
FACT THAT PENALTIES DO GO UP, AS
YOU SAID.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT WAYS TO
CALCULATE THE PENALTY BUT MORE
OR LESS THE PENALTIES FOR NOT
HAVING COVERAGE IN 2015 ARE TWO
TO THREE TIMES HIGHER THAN THE
FIRST YEAR AROUND.
FOR EXAMPLE, ONE LEVEL OF
CALCULATING,
PENALTY WENT FROM $95 IN 2014 TO
325 IN 2015.
SO DRAMATIC JUMP.
SO THERE IS THAT ISSUE.
WE WILL GET, NEXT MONTH, THE
SUPREME COURT WILL HEAR
ARGUMENTS ON THE CASE, KING
VERSUS FURWELL THAT YOU'RE
ALLUDING TO AND THAT WILL HAVE
THE COURT LOOK AT THE ISSUE OF
WHETHER SUBSIDIES THAT GO TO
HELP PURCHASE HEALTH COVERAGE
APPLY TO ONLY PURCHASE COVERAGE
THROUGH THE STATE-BASED
EXCHANGES OR THROUGH ALL THE
EXCHANGES INCLUDING THE FEDERAL
ONES.
>> Woodruff: CREATING A
PUSH-PULL GOING ON HERE?
>> SIGN UP BECAUSE YOU WILL BE
PENALIZED IF YOU DON'T.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THE WHOLE
THING COULD CHANGE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT AND A LOT OF
THIS IS PEOPLE WON'T EVEN KNOW
ABOUT THE PENALTY
FILE THEIR TAX IFS THEY HAVEN'T
PAID ATTENTION TO AC AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT ENROLLMENT.
MANY DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT THE
MANDATED COVERAGE TILL THEY
SIGNED THEIR TAXES.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL TALK TO YOU
AGAIN.
MARY AGNES CAREY, SUSAN DENTZER,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NOW, ADVANCEMENTS
IN TECHNOLOGY TO HELP PEOPLE
FEEL.
SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT MILES
O'BRIEN HAD MUCH OF HIS LEFT ARM
AMPUTATED LAST YEAR AFTER AN
ACCIDENT WHILE ON A REPORTING
TRIP FOR THE NEWSHOUR.HE HAS SIG
LEAPS FORWARD FOR MODERN
PROSTHETICS.
LAST NIGHT, HE TESTED A
PROTOTYPE ROBOTIC ARM.
AND TONIGHT, ONE OF THE HARDEST
THINGS TO REPLICATE THAT MIGHT
FINALLY BE WITHIN REACH.
HIS STORY IS PART OF OUR
"BREAKTHROUGHS" SERIES.
ADJUST AS NEEDED, OKAY?
HAND WITHOUT A SENSE OF
TOUCH ISN'T REALLY A HAND AT
ALL.
IT'S MORE LIKE A PAIR OF PLIERS.
WATCH BLINDFOLDED HAND AMPUTEE
IGOR TRY TO PICK UP BLOCKS
WITHOUT A SENSE OF TOUCH.
NOT VERY PRODUCTIVE.
THAT WAS NO SENSATION?
>> NO SENSATION.
>> Reporter: YOU WERE --
LITERALLY GOING BLIND.
>> Reporter: WATCH WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN THE SENSORY
PERCEPTION IS TURNED ON.
IT'S LIKE NIGHT AND DAY.
>> IF I GRAB IT JUST RIGHT, I
FEEL ALL THREE FINGERS, OR TWO
FINGERS.
THEN I KNOW I HAVE IT, THEN MOVE
IT OVER AND DROP IT.
>> Reporter: IS IT THE PHANTOM
HAND YOU FEEL IT IN?
>> TO ME, IT FEELS LIKE MY HAND.
FEELS LIKE SOMETHING BETWEEN MY
TWO FINGERS THAT'S VIBRATING.
>> Reporter: FOR IGOR WHO LOST
HIS HAND IN AN INDUSTRIAL
ACCIDENT FOUR YEARS AGO,
SOMETHING POWERED BY BATTERY AND
MADE OF PLASTIC, METAL AND
SILICON CAN BECOME HIS HAND.
THIS IS WHAT EVERY UPPER LIMB
AMPUTEE LIKE ME DREAMS OF, NOT
JUST WEARING A FUNCTIONAL TOOL,
BECOMING WHOLE.
BUT I PROBABLY SHOULDN'T GET MY
HOPES UP TOO HIGH.
>> WILL YOU HAVE YOUR HAND?
NO.
WILL YOU HAVE SOMETHING THAT
WILL MAKE YOU FORGET YOU
HAVE A HAND?
YEAH.
>> THE IMPLANTED E.M.G. IS
IMPLANTED DIRECTLY INTO THE
MUSCLE KNEE DUSTIN IS A
RESEARCHER.
>> WHEN YOU SEE THE PROSTHESIS
TOUCH SOMETHING, YOU FEEL IT.
NOT HERE BUT IN YOUR FINGERTIP
THAT'S VISUALLY CO-LOCATED WITH
THE PROSTHESIS, A BIG JUMP TO
BEING WHAT YOU ARE.
>> Reporter: HE IS HOPING TO
FIND WAY FOR AMPUTEES TO ACCESS
THE UNTAPPED POTENTIAL OF A NEW
GENERATION OF PROSTHETIC ARMS.
>> THAT'S INCREDIBLE.
>> Reporter: AS I DISCOVERED
AT THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY
APPLIED PHYSICS LABORATORY,
RESEARCHERS HAVE MADE A LOT OF
PROGRESS ENGINEERING A NEAR
HUMAN ARM, ABILITY DECIPHER
MUSCLE CONTRACTIONS IN MY STUMP,
I WAS ABLE TO TURN THAT INTO
FINE MOTOR CONTROL WITH RELATIVE
EASE.
>> CENTURY IS A DIFFERENT GAME,
MORE COMPLEX BECAUSE YOU
STIMULATE, BUT THEN IT GOES TO
THE BRAIN AND COMPLEX IDEAS OF
PERCEPTION LIKE WHAT DO YOU FEEL
AND HOW DO YOU FEEL IT IS A MUCH
MORE COMPLICATED PROCESS.
>> Reporter: THE PROBLEM IS
TWOFOLD -- TOUCH SENSORS FOR
PROSTHETICS NEED IMPROVEMENT BUT
THE BIGGER CHALLENGE IS MAKING
SENSORY INFORMATION UNDERSTAND
BIBLE AND USEFUL TO AN AMPUTEE.
>> WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT IS THE
X-RAY OF HIS ARM PROBABLY A
COUPLE OF WEEKS AFTER SURGERY.
>> Reporter: IN 2011, SURGEONS
IMPLANTED ELECTRODES THAT
ENCIRCLE THE THREE MAIN SENSORY
NERVE BUNDLES IN IGOR'S INJURED
ARM.
>> YOU'RE LOOKING AT THE THREE
DIFFERENT ELECTRODES, SO YOU CAN
SEE THE POINTS AND THE DEVICE
ITSELF, THIS IS ON THE YOU WILL
NARE NERVE.
THERE IS ANOTHER ONE ON THE
MEDIAN NERVE.
NEWS ANOTHER ONE ON THE RADIAL
NERVE.
>> THAT'S THE INDEX FINGER BEING
ACTIVATED?
>> Reporter: SENSORS IN THE
PROSTHETIC HAND IGOR WEARS
TRANSMIT IMPULSE ALSO THROUGH A
COMPUTER AND THESE WIRES INTO
THE ELECTRODES INSIDE HIS ARM.
THE ELECTRODES STIMULATE THE
SENSORY NERVES THEY'RE ATTACHED
TO, AND IGOR'S BRAIN DOES THE
REST.
>> SO IN MY MIND, I ACTUALLY
FEEL LIKE I'M DOING THIS WHEN I
HAVE IT BETWEEN BOTH FINGERS.
>> Reporter: REALLY?
IS IT SECOND NATURE TO YOU NOW?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: YOU DON'T HAVE TO
THINK ABOUT IT SO MUCH?
>> NO, I DON'T HAVE TO THINK
ABOUT IT SO MUCH.
>> Reporter: IGOR IS ABLE TO
FEEL THIS WAY WITH 20 CHANNELS
OF SENSORY DATA DELIVERED BY THE
IMPLANTED ELECTRODES.
IT'S STATICE AM RADIO COMPARED
TO WHAT WE'RE BORN WITH.
>> TO CONTROL THE HAND NORMALLY
THERE'S THOUSANDS OF AXIONS THAT
CONTROL PARTS OF THE FINGERS.
WE RIGHT NOW CAN TALK TO TEN.
SO YOU CAN IMAGINE THAT
CONNECTION, THAT INTERFACE STILL
NEEDS TO BE WORKED ON AND THAT'S
WHERE WE'RE MAKING PROGRESS BUT
WE'RE STILL BEHIHA
CAN DO FROM AN ENGINEERING
PERSPECTIVE.
>> Reporter: ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AT A LAB AT U.C.L.A.,
MECHANICAL ENGINEER VERONICA
SANTOS IS TRYING TO CLOSE THE
GAP.
>> FOR A LONG TIME PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN TRYING TO BUILD ROBOTS THAT
EMULATE HUMANS BUT THERE'S NOW A
WAY WE CAN ACTUALLY DIRECTLY
IMPACT SOMEONE'S QUALITY OF LIFE
BY BUILDING A ROBOT THAT BECOMES
PART OF SOMEONE'S BODY.
>> Reporter: IN DR. SANTOS'
BAYOU ELECTRONICS LAB, THEY'RE
CONSTRUCT AGO LANGUAGE OF TOUCH
THAT A COMPUTE AROUND HUMAN CAN
BOTH UNDERSTAND.
THEY'RE QUANTIFYING IT WITH
MECHANICAL TOUCH SENSORS THAT
HAVE OBJECTS OF DIFFERENT SIZES
AND TEXTURES AND ARE ABLE TO
TRANSACT THE INFORMATION INTO
DATA A COMPUTER CAN UNDERSTAND.
>> FOR EXAMPLE, MILES, IF YOU
PUT YOUR HAND IN THERE TO STOP
IT, WE WOULD BE ABLE TO RECORD
THE POSTURE WHEN IT CAME INTO
TA YOU AND THE GENERAL
AREAS OF THE FINGERTIPS MAKING
CONTACT AND HOW MUCH PRESSURE
THERE WAS OR HOW MUCH THE SKIN
WAS DEFORMING AS YOU MADE
CONTACT, BUT THOSE ARE THE TYPES
OF RAW PRECEPTS YOU WOULD GIVE
TO SOMEONE AND WITH TRAINING
THEY WOULD PUT IT TOGETHER AND
SAY, HEY, I THINK I'M TOUCHING
SOMETHING SOFT.
>> Reporter: THE TRAINING
INCLUDES MACHINE LEARNING.
THE DATA IS USED TO CREATE A
FORMULA OR ALGORITHM THAT GIVES
THE COMPUTER ABILITY TO EACH
COMMON PATTERNS BETWEEN ITEMS IT
HAS IN ITS LIBRARY OF EXPERIENCE
AND SOMETHING IT NEVER FELT
BEFORE.
>> WE'RE INTERESTED IN
DEVELOPING THIS IDEA OF
ARTIFICIAL HAPTIC INTELLIGENCE.
>> Reporter: MAKING IT USEFUL
FOR AN AMPUTEE IS THE BIG
CHALLENGE.
PATROLS THECT AND ROBOTIC
TECHNOLOGY HAS FAR SURPASSED THE
ABILITY OF AN AMPUTEE TO COMMAND
A LIMB OR UNDERSTAND WHAT THE
DEVICE IS SENSING.
THE BOTTLENECK IS MELDING THE
TECHNOLOGY WITH THE BIOLOGY.
>> I THINK ONE OF THE CHALLENGES
IS UNDERSTANDING HOW MUCH
INFORMATION CAN YOU FLOOD
SOMEONE WITH BEFORE, YOU KNOW,
THEY CAN'T MAKE USE OF IT IN.
A PER POCKET WORLD, IF WE DID
OUR JOB RIGHT, YOU WOULDN'T EVEN
KNOW WE'D DONE O JOB.
YOUR PROSTHETIC HAND WOULD FEEL
LIKE YOUR NATIVE LIMB WHERE ALL
OF THE ROBOTICS, ALGORITHMS AND
INTELLIGENCE WE IT BILT IN AT
THE VERY LOW LEVEL ACT JUST LIKE
YOUR SPINAL CORD.
YOU DON'T EVEN KNOW THEY'RE
THERE.
ALL YOU KNOW IS IT'S MORE FUN TO
USE THIS ARM, IT'S EASIER TO USE
THE ARM, AND OUR JOB WOULD BE
DONE.
>> YOU KNOW, OBVIOUSLY --
>> Reporter: STEP BY STEP,
RESEARCHERS ARE FINDING WAYS TO
LET AMPUTEES KNOW WHAT THEY'RE
FEELING AND HOW HARD THEY'RE
SQUEEZING.
DUSTIN TYLER IS WORKING TO MAKE
HIS TECHNOLOGY IMPLANTABLE LIKE
A PACEMAKER.
FOR NOW THE WORK IS CONFINED TO
A LAB.
IGOR LOOKS FORWARD TO THE DAY HE
CAN TAKE HIS TOUCHY HAND HOME.
>> I WANT TO KNOW WHAT IT WILL
BE LIKE HOLDING MY WIFE'S HAND
AGAIN AFTER FOUR YEARS.
>> Reporter: THIS WILL MEAN A
LOT FOR AMPUTEES, WON'T IT?
>> I HOPE SO.
ONE LITTLE STEP FORWARD, IT'S
BIG TO ME.
>> Reporter: HUGE STEP.
I GET IT.
IF THE NEXT PERSON GETS IT,
THAT'S EVEN BETTER.
>> Reporter: THANKS TO YOU,
IGOR, I MIGHT BE ONE OF THOSE
PEOPLE.
FOR NOW I MUST MAKE DO WITH THE
TRIED AND TRUE HOOK, RELIABLE,
RUGGED AND EASILY REPAIRED.
WELL SUITED FOR MY FAR-FLUNG
ADVENTURES IN THE FIELD.
BUT FOR ME, IT'S TOO HOT, TOO
UNCOMFORTABLE, AND NOT USEFUL
ENOUGH TO WEAR ALL THE TIME.
SO MOSTLY, I DO WITHOUT.
TURNS OUT NAVIGATING WITH ONE
ARM IN A BIMANUAL WORLD IS NOT
ONLY POSSIBLE, WITH SOME
CREATIVE THINKING, A FEW GADGETS
AND PRACTICE, IT BECOMES
TRIVIAL, SOMETIMES LOW-TECH OR
NO-TECH IS REALLY ALL I NEED FOR
NOW.
MILES O'BRIEN, THE PBS
"NewsHour", WASHINGTON.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, MILES
REPORTS ON A MAN WHO, SINCE
LOSING HIS OWN ARM, HAS BECOME A
PIONEER OF ADVANCED PROSTHETICS.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
NOW TO NIGERIA, AND THOSE
RUNNING AWAY FROM THE TERRORIST
GROUP BOKO HARAM.
JONATHAN MILLER REPORTS FROM A
CAMP WHERE THOUSANDS ARE SEEKING
REFUGE AND MEETS A YOUNG WOMAN
WHO WAS RECENTLY HELD CAPTIVE
ALONGSIDE THE ABDUCTED SCHOOL
GIRLS.
>> Reporter: IN THE HEAT AND THE
DUST, THERE'S A DESPERATE
SCRAMBLE FOR HANDOUTS FOR THOSE
LEFT WITH NOTHING.
BEREFT, DISENFRANCHISED AND
BROKEN BY BOKO HARAM, THESE
SURVIVORS OF REBEL ATTACKS
ACROSS NORTHEASTERN NIGERIA LIVE
HAND-TO-MOUTH, WITH LITTLE OR NO
HELP FROM THEIR GOVERNMENT.
2,000 IN THIS INFORMAL CAMP ON
THE OUTSKIRTS OF ABUJA.
NO MONEY, NO FOOD, NO WORK, NO
HOPE OF HEADING BACK HOME.
>> SO MANY PLACES, 27 LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AFFECTED IN BORNO,
ALL HAS BEEN TARGET TO BOKO
HARAM.
>> WHEN THEY START BURNING THE
HOUSES, EVERYBODY WILL RUN AWAY
FROM THE HOUSES AND THEN THEY
WILL FETCH OUT ALL THE MEN FROM
THERE.
ANYONE THAT THEY FETCH THEY MAY
KILL HIM.
>> Reporter: IF YOU HAVE HAD ONE
OF YOUR RELATIVES KILLED BY BOKO
HARAM WOULD YOU RAISE YOUR ARM?
>> SO MANY OF THEM.
>> Reporter: A CHORUS OF VOICES:
ALL OF US, THEY SAY, FOR SOME
IT'S THEIR FATHER, FOR SOME IT'S
THEIR HUSBAND, BROTHERS OR
CHILDREN.
"MY MOTHER," SAYS ONE.
SOME MISCARRIED, OTHERS BURIED
THEIR HUSBANDS BEFORE STARTING
WALKING, FOR MILES.
EVERY SINGLE PERSON WHO HAS FLED
THE SCORCHED EARTH RAMPAGE OF
BOKO HARAM HAS A HORRIFYING
STORY TO TELL.
MANY STILL SHUDDER AT THE VERY
SOUND OF THEIR NAME.
THEY HAVE TURNED LIVES UPSIDE
DOWN, SPLIT UP FAMILIES, LOOTED,
TORCHED, RAPED, MURDERED AND
KIDNAPPED.
IT WAS WHEN I WAS TALKING TO ONE
ESCAPED KIDNAP VICTIM THAT
LEARNED SHE'D BEEN HELD WITHSOMM
CHIBOK AS RECENTLY AS THREE
MONTHS AGO.
MONICA WAS ABDUCTED, THEN
MARCHED FOR WEEKS INTO THE
SAMBISA FOREST, THE LAIR OF BOKO
HARAM.
FOR THREE DAYS, LAST NOVEMBER,
SHE WAS HELD WITH 24 OF THE
MISSING 219 SCHOOLGIRLS FROM
CHIBOK.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE FIRST
NEWS OF ANY OF THEM SINCE THIS
VIDEO EIGHT MONTHS AGO
PURPORTING TO SHOW THEIR FORCED
CONVERSION TO ISLAM.
MONICA SAYS THEY REMAINED TRUE
TO THEIR CHRISTIAN FAITH.
SHE SAID THEY'D BEEN COERCED TO
COOK FOR THEIR CAPTORS BUTTER BE
UNHARMED, JUST TERRIBLY HOME
SICK.
THEY HAD BEEN DIVIDED INTO
SEVERAL SMALL GROUPS.
WHEN MONICA ESCAPED, SHE WALKED
FOR DAYS THROUGH THE BUSH WITH
NO FOOD.
HER BABY DIED ON THE WAY.
SHE SAYS SHE IS HAUNTED BY
MEMORIES OF THE DAY BOKO HARAM
ATTACKED AND BURNED DOWN HER
VILLAGE AND HER YOUNG LIFE
CHANGED FOREVER.
>> WHEN THEY CAME
>> Reporter: THERE IS NOW A
VAST TRACT OF THIS COUNTRY WHERE
GOING TO SCHOOL IS AN ACT OF
DEFIANCE, BUT THERE'S NOT A
SCHOOL CHILD IN NIGERIA WHO
DOESN'T KNOW OF THE GIRLS FROM
CHIBOK AND WILL REJOICE IN THE
NEWS THAT WE NOW KNOW SOME OF
THEM ARE ALIVE.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA
WENT TO SILICON VALLEY TODAY TO
CALL FOR MORE COOPERATION
BETWEEN PRIVATE COMPANIES AND
THE GOVERNMENT WHEN IT COMES TO
DEFENDING AGAINST CYBER-ATTACKS.
IN THE WAKE OF MAJOR HACKS
AGAINST HEALTH INSURER ANTHEM,
AND SONY PICTURES, THE PRESIDENT
TOLD EXECUTIVES THEY NEED TO
SHARE MORE INFORMATION.
BUT TODAY'S SUMMIT ALSO COMES
AMID GROWING TENSIONS BETWEEN
TECH COMPANIES AND THE
ADMINISTRATION OVER PRIVACY AND
CIVIL LIBERTIES, A POINT THE
PRESIDENT ACKNOWLEDGED.
>> IN ALL OUR WORK WE HAVE TO
MAKE SURE WE ARE PROTECTING THE
PRIVACY AND CIVIL LIBERTY OF THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
WE GRAPPLE WITH THESE ISSUES IN
GOME
WE'VE PURSUED IMPORTANT REFORMS
TO MAKE SURE WE ARE RESPECTING
PEOPLE'S PRIVACY, AS WELL AS
ENSURING OUR NATIONAL SECURITY.
THE PRIVATE SECTOR WRESTLES WITH
THIS AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: SEVERAL C.E.O.'s OF
TOP TECH COMPANIES INCLUDING
GOOGLE, FACEBOOK AND YAHOO DID
NOT ATTEND, REPORTEDLY OVER
ANGER AND DISAPPOINTMENT ABOUT A
LACK OF REFORM IN THE
GOVERNMENT'S BROAD SURVEILLANCE
PROGRAMS.
THE REVELATIONS ABOUT THE
GOVERNMENT'S REACH ARE THE
SUBJECT OF A DOCUMENTARY
NOMINATED FOR AN ACADEMY AWARD.
JEFFREY BROWN PICKS IT UP FROM
THERE, PART OF OUR SERIES, "THE
NEWSHOUR GOES TO THE MOVIES."
>> MY NAME IS EDWARD SNOWDEN.
I GO BY ED.
>> Brown: THE DOCUMENTARY,
"CITIZENFOUR", BRINGS US INTO A
HONG KONG HOTEL ROOM AS FORMER
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
CONTRACTOR EDWARD SNOWDEN
REVEALS SECRETS THAT WOULD MAKE
FOR BLOCKBUSTER HEADLINES
BEGINNING IN JUNE 2013:  THE
LARGE-SCALE COLLECTION OF PHONE
AND INTERNET DATA BY THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT.
>> EVEN IF YOU'RE DOING NOTHING
WRONG, YOU'RE BEING WATCHED AND
RECORDED.
>> Brown: NEWS ORGANIZATION
WOULD PUBLIC STORIES OF A
MASSIVE DATABASE, ASSEMBLED
SINCE 2006, UNDER THE PATRIOT
ACT, COLLECTING CALL DATA FROM
MILLIONS OF PHONE COMPANY
CUSTOMERS, AND TAPPING INTO THE
CENTRAL SERVERS OF MAJOR
INTERNET COMPANIES.
FOR SOME, SNOWDEN WAS A FREE
SPEECH HERO.
OTHERS, INCLUDING PRESIDENT
OBAMA, CALLED FOR HIM TO COME
BACK TO THE US AND FACE CHARGES
FOR ESPIONAGE.
OTHERS INCLUDING PRESIDENT OBAMA
CALLED ON SNOWDEN TO COME BACK
TO THE U.S. AND FACE CHARGES FOR
ESPIONAGE.
>> NO, I DON'T THINK MR. SNOWDEN
WAS A PATRIOT.
SO THE FACT IS, IS THAT MR.
SNOWDEN HAS BEEN CHARGED WITH
THREE FELONIES.
IF, IN FACT, HE BELIEVES THAT
WHAT HE DID WAS RIGHT, THEN,
LIKE EVERY AMERICAN CITIZEN, HE
CAN COME HERE, APPEAR BEFORE THE
COURT WITH A LAWYER AND MAKE HIS
CASE.
>> Brown: BEGINNING WITH
ENCRYPTED EMAILS AND THEN IN
HONG KONG, SNOWDEN MET WITH AND
TOLD HIS STORY TO JOURNALIST
GLEN GREENWALD, THEN WITH THE
GUARDIAN NEWSPAPER, AND
FILMMAKER LAURA POITRAS, THE
DIRECTOR OF THE OSCAR-NOMINATED
DOCUMENTARY.
I SPOKE TO THE TWO EARLIER THIS
AFTERNOON.
>> WELCOME TO BOTH OF YOU.
LAURA POITRAS, LET ME ASK YOU,
WHAT DID YOU WANT THE FILM TO DO
THAT THE STEADY DRUM BEAT OF
NEWS REVELATIONS WOULD NOT DO?
WHY A FILM?
>> AS A DOCUMENT RIFILMMAKER,
ALTHOUGH COMPONENTS OF
JOURNALISM HAVE TO BE TRUTHFUL
AND FACTUAL, IT'S REALLY SAYING
SOMETHING ABOUT BIGGER ISSUES.
FOR ME IT WAS LOOKING AT THE
STORY OF THE N.S.A. AND
INDIVIDUAL STORIES OF COURAGE OF
NOT JUST EDWARD SNOWDEN BUT
OTHER WHISTLEBLOWERS COMING
FORWARD AND LOOKING AT
BECAUSE WE HAD A GOOD SENSE THAT
THIS WAS SOMETHING SIGNIFICANT
AND
IMPORTANT.
>> Brown: THE CRITICS OF
EDWARD SNOWDEN WOULD LOOK AT
WHAT YOU ARE DOING AS
COLLABORATING WITH HIM, IN A
SENSE, WORKING WITH HIM TO BRING
OUT THIS STORY.
>> THIS IS A STANDARD ACCUSATION
THAT GETS MADE TO DELEGITIMIZE
JOURNALISM BURKS WHAT WE DID WAS
CLASSIC JOURNALISM.
WE HAD A WHISTLEBLOWER COME TO
US WITH SECRETS HE THOUGHT
SHOULD NOT HAVE BEEN CONCEALED
THAT THE PUBLIC HAD A RIGHT TO
KNOW AND ASKED US TO USE THE
STANDARD JOURNALISTIC PROCESS OF
REPORTING IT.
WE DID AND FEEL GOOD ABOUT IT.
>> Brown: LAURA POITRAS, THE
FILM PLAYS LIKE A THRILLER.
HOW DID IT FEEL IN THAT ROOM?
WHAT WAS IT LIKE WITH EDWARD
SNOWDEN?
WERE YOU SURPRISED WHEN YOU
FINALLY MET HIM?
>> WE DIDN'T MANUFACTURE THE
KIND OF THRILLER ASPECTS TO IT.
THAT ACTUALLY CAME WITH THE
STORY.
I STARTED RECEIVING ANONYMOUS
E-MAILS FROM A STRANGER MAKING
CLAIMS OF, YOU KNOW, MASS
GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE, AND
THEN WE MET IN HONG KONG, SO IT
FELT VERY MUCH LIKE A THRILLER
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE, THERE WERE
A LOT OF UNKNOWNS.
WHEN GLEN AND I WENT, WE WERE
VERY SURPRISED WHEN WE MET
SOMEBODY MUCH YOUNGER THAN WE
EXPECTED.
WE EXPECTED TO MEET SOMEBODY IN
HIS 50s, SO IT TOOK US A BIT
OF TIME TO ADJUST TO THAT.
THE PERSON WE MET WAS INCREDIBLY
CALM IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES HE PUT
HIMSELF IN AND GIVEN THE RISKS
HE WAS TAKING.
>> Brown: AGAIN GLEN
GREENWALD, FAST FORWARD, IS
THERE EVIDENCE WE CAN POINT TO
THAT COLLECTING THE DATA HAS
HARMED PEOPLE?
IS IT THE FEAR OF IT, THE IDEA
OF IT OR IS THERE ACTUAL HARM?
>> THERE'S ALL KINDS OF HARM.
WE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO REPORT ON
THE TARGETING OF POLITICAL
DISSIDENTS, OF PEOPLE WHO VISIT
WEB SITES LIKE WIKILEAKS WHO
HAVE THEIR DATA TRAPPED,
TARGETING ON ECONOMIC
CONFERENCES, ON THE U.N.,
EAVESDROPPING ON PEOPLE WHILE
THEY NEGOTIATE TRADE AGREEMENTS,
BUT, YOU KNOW, I THINK, MORE
BROADLY, IT IS THE FACT THAT
KNOWING YOU LIVE IN A
SURVEILLANCE STATE CHILLS THE
ACTIONS OF NOT JUST JOURNALISTS
BUT HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIVISTS AND
POLITICAL ORGANIZERS AND LAWYERS
AND PSYCHOLOGISTS AND MEDICAL
PROFESSIONALS, PEOPLE WHO NEED
SECRECY.
>> AND HOW DO YOU SEE EDWARD
SNOWDEN EVEN NOW?
>> I SEE HIM AS SOMEBODY WHO DID
WHAT WE SHOULD WANT PEOPLE IN
GOVERNMENT AND WITH ACCESS TO
SECRETS TO DO, LIKE DANIEL
RALSBERG WHO IS WILDLY
CONSIDERED A HERO WHO DISCOARSE
SOMETHING THE PUBLIC OUGHT TO
KNOW ABOUT AND DID IT KNOWING HE
WAS PUTTING HIS LIFE AND LIBERTY
IN JEOPARDY AND TO ME IT'S AN
INCREDIBLY ADMIRAL ACT.
DEMOCRACY DEPEND ON PEOPLE LIKE
EDWARD SNOWDEN.
>> Brown: BUT EVEN MANY PEOPLE
WHO ARE GLAD TO KNOW THE
INFORMATION THINK THAT HE SHOULD
COME BACK AND PAY THE PRICE FOR
AN ACT OF CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE.
>> I THINK IT'S EASY TO SAY HE
SHOULD COME BACK AND SUBMIT TO A
CAGE THE REST OF HIS LIFE, BUT I
DON'T THINK THAT'S HIS
OBLIGATION TO DO.
HE'S BEEN GIVEN POLITICAL
ASYLUM.
DANIEL ASBURG WHO SUBMITTED TO
THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM IN 02, SAID
IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE POST
NIN9/11 ERA, IF YOU ARE CONVICTD
OF SECURITY LEAK, YOU DON'T GET
A FAIR TRIAL AND SAID EDWARD WAS
RIGHT TO SEEK ASYLUM BECAUSE HIS
POLITICAL RIGHTS WOULD BE ABUSED
AND NOT PROTECTED.
>> Brown: SINCE THE
REVELATIONS, THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF TALK OF REFORMS, CALLS OF
REFORMS FROM THE PRESIDENT, FROM
CONGRESS, FROM TECH COMPANIES.
DO YOU SEE ANY CHANGES THAT HAVE
COME FROM SNOWDEN'S REVELATIONS?
>> WE'RE SEEING LOOT OF CHANGES
HAPPENING IN THE TECH COMPANIES.
I THINK THAT THE DISCLOSURES
HAVE CREATED AN AWARENESS OF THE
NEED FOR PRIVACY, THAT THEY KNOW
THE CUSTOMERS ARE GOING TO WANT.
SO WE'VE SEEN A LOT OF CHANGES
HAPPENING THERE.
WE SEE GOOGLE IS USING
ENCRYPTION OF SERVERS WHEN IT
WAS DISLEASED THE N.S.A. WAS
TAPPING INTO THEIR NERVERS, SO
WE'VE SEEN THOSE CHANGES.
WHAT WE'VE SEEN LESS OF IS
GOVERNMENT CHANGES.
ALSO, I THINK INTERNATIONALLY
THERE'S A SHIFT OF CONSCIOUSNESS
OF THE THREAT AND DANGERS OF THE
KIND OF INDISCRIMINATE MASS
SURVEILLANCE THAT IS DISCLOSED.
>> Brown: AND WHAT DO YOU WANT
PEOPLE WHO ARE COMPANIES OR
GOVERNMENTS TO TAKE FROM THE
FILM?
DO YOU WANT SOME ACTION FROM THE
>> I MAKE FILMS BECAUSE I
FILM?
BELIEVE IN THE POWER OF
>> I MAKE FILMS BECAUSE I
COMMUNICATING.
BELIEVE IN THE POWER OF
SO HOW PEOPLE THEN USE THAT
COMMUNICATING.
INFORMATION, YOU KNOW, THAT'S UP
SO HOW PEOPLE THEN USE THAT
TO THEM.
INFORMATION, YOU KNOW, THAT'S UP
SO I DO HOPE THAT IT RAISES
TO THEM.
AWARENESS AND MAYBE TAKES AN
SO I DO HOPE THAT IT RAISES
ISSUE THAT'S ABSTRACT AND MAKES
AWARENESS AND MAYBE TAKES AN
IT A BIT MORE HUMAN OR VISCERAL
ISSUE THAT'S ABSTRACT AND MAKES
SO YOU CAN UNDERSTAND THE
IT A BIT MORE HUMAN OR VISCERAL
CONSEQUENCES.
SO YOU CAN UNDERSTAND THE
>> Brown: THE FILM
CONSEQUENCES.
"CITIZENFOUR," LAURA POITRAS,
>> Brown: THE FILM
GLEN GREENWALD.
"CITIZENFOUR," LAURA POITRAS,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
GLEN GREENWALD.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: IT'S BEEN A BUSY
AND SERIOUS NEWS WEEK.
PRESIDENT OBAMA ASKED CONGRESS
TO APPROVE MILITARY FORCE
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
CONGRESS IS STRUGGLING AND NEAR
A DEADLINE TO FUND THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY,
AND THE MEDIA WORLD FACED
MULTIPLE SURPRISING HEADLINES.
TO ANALYZE IT ALL, SHIELDS AND
BROOKS.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND NEW YORK TIMES
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
SO A LOT TO TALK ABOUT.
THE TOUGHEST NEWS OF THE WEEK
HAD TO BE THE CONFIRMATION OF
THE DEATH OF THE AMERICAN AID
WORKER KAYLA MUELLER AT THE
HANDS OF I.S.I.S.
MARK, IT RAISES THE QUESTION HOW
IS THIS ADMINISTRATION, HOW IS
IT UNITED STATES DOING AND
DEALING WITH I.S.I.S. AND
SPECIFICALLY THIS AUTHORIZATION
OF FORCE, FOR THE USE OF FORCE
THE PRESIDENT SENT TO CONGRESS.
DOES IT LOOK LIKE THEY'VE STRUCK
THE RIGHT FORMULA THERE?
>> FIRST, KAYLA MUELLER, THIS IS
A WOMAN WHO DEVOTED LIFE
GENEROUSLY FROM EVERY REPORT TO
COMFORTING THE AFFLICTED.
THE TRAGEDY OF HER DEATH IS EVEN
COMPOUNDED MORE BY THE LIFE SHE
LED AND THE LOSS SHE LEAVES.
JUDY, I.S.I.S. AND THE MIDDLE
EAST REMAIN A RUBRICS CUBE THAT
THE UNITED STATES HAS NOT
FIGURED OUT.
EVERYTHING OVER THERE IS
FIVE-SIDED, AND WE HAVEN'T
FIGURED OUT.
THIS IS NOT A WAR TO BE WON.
THEY ARE A FORCE TO BE
CONTROLLED, TO BE REDUCED, TO BE
MANAGED.
BUT THIS IS NOT -- WE ARE REALLY
NOT GOING TO INTRODUCE AMERICAN
GROUND TROOPS IN THE AREA?
WE MAY TO SOME DEGREE RESTRICT
THEIR MILITARY EFFECTIVENESS,
BUT THAT IS THE REALITY.
WE'VE ALREADY DONE THAT ONCE IN
THIS CENTURY.
WE SENT AMERICAN GROUND TROOPS
IN AND WE'RE NOT GOING TO DO IT.
AS FAR AS AUTHORIZATION OF
FORCE, A SHOUT OUT TO SENATOR
TIM KAINE OF VIRGINIA, ALONE
HE'S BEEN A VOICE SAYING WE'RE
SENDING AMERICANS INTO COMBAT,
INTO HARM'S WAY, WE ARE AT WAR.
THE CONGRESS HAS ABDICATED ITS
RESPONSIBILITY BY NOT DECLARING
OR CONFRONTING THAT OR DEALING
WITH IT OR PASSING ANY
RESOLUTION, IT'S THE MOST COLUMN
RESPONSIBILITY CONGRESS HAS AND
THEY DUCKED IT, DUCKED IT
THROUGH THE ELECTION.
THEY WANT CARTE BLANCHE, THEY
WANT TO DECIDE WHEN TO USE POWER
AND DON'T WANT THEIR HANDS TIED.
WE'RE FINALLY GOING TO HAVE A
DEBATE AND I THINK SENATOR TIM
KAINE FROM VIRGINIA DESERVES
CREDIT FOR FORCING THE HAND TO
HAVE THE ADMINISTRATION.
>> Woodruff: THE LANGUAGE IN
THE REQUEST THE WHITE HOUSE SENT
OVER THOR AUTHORIZATION, DOES IT
GET THE WHITE HOUSE ANY CLOSER
TO THIS.
>> NO, IT'S AMBIVALENT.
THE MEANS AND THE PROCESS AND
THE DURATION, I DON'T KNOW WHY
WE NEED TO PUT THAT IN THE USE
OF FORCE.
LAST THREE YEARS, WE'RE NOT
GOING TO THIS, WE'RE GOING TO DO
THIS.
IF WE'RE GOING TO USE FORCE WE
NEED TO DO WHAT THE PRESIDENT
AND THE MILITARY LEADERSHIP
THINK IS PROPER AND THAT
SHOULDN'T BE IN THE NORGS.
THE KILLING OF THE HOSTAGES IS
AN OUTRAGE BUT NOT REALLY THE
MOST IMPORTANT THING THAT'S
GOING ON OVER THERE.
I HAPPEN TO BE IN CONVERSATION
WITH A BUNCH OF FINANCIAL
ANALYSTS THIS WEEK AND ASKED
THEM WHAT'S THE BIGGEST THREAT
TO THE WORLD ECONOMY AND I
EXPECTED THEM TO SAY THE EURO
CRISIS.
THEY BOTH INDEPENDENTLY SAID
I.S.I.S.
IF I.S.I.S. DESTABILIZES THE
MIDDLE EAST, THAT IS AN ECONOMIC
CAT CENTURIESUM WITH HUMAN
SUFFERING.
>> Woodruff: BECAUSE OF OIL?
BECAUSE OF OIL, BECAUSE OF
THE DESTABILIZATION OF THIS MOST
FRAGILE REGION OF THE COUNTRY,
AND SO I THINK I DISAGREE WITH
MARK A LITTLE.
THE MIDDLE EAST HAS ALWAYS BEEN
THE MIDDLE EAST.
FOR 5,000 YEARS IT'S BEEN A
TROUBLED ZONE.
THE ISLAMIC STATE SEEMS TO BE A
NEW ORDER OF MAGNITUDE, A NEW
ORDER OF THREAT AND EVIL EVEN BY
THE STANDARDS OF THE MIDDLE
EAST.
SO TAKING THEM ON AND CONTAINING
THEM SEEMS TO BE A HIGHER ORDER
THAN ANYTHING WE FACED IN THE
MIDDLE EAST FOR A LONG, LONG
TIME, AND THE PRESIDENT AND
FUTURE PRESIDENTS SHOULD DO WHAT
THEY NEED TO DO TO DO THAT AND
THEY SHOULDN'T HAVE SORT OF
RESOLUTIONS WHICH ARE REALLY
RESOLUTIONS OF AMBIVALENCE.
>> Woodruff: BUT THE
ADMINISTRATION IS BEING
CRITICIZED, MARK, AT LEAST WHAT
I AM READING, FOR NOT BEING
SPECIFIC ENOUGH, I MEAN FOR --
THEY NEED TO SAY MORE ABOUT WHAT
THEY'RE GOING TO DO.
DAVID'S POINT IS THEY DIDN'T
NEED TO SAY AS MUCH AS THEY DID.
>> THEY WOULD NOT HAVE A
PERMANENT LAND FORCE IS WHAT
THEY SAID, BUT THEY
FREEDOM, THE NEXT PRESIDENT,
INCLUDING THIS ONE, FOR THREE
YEARS IT WOULD BE IN FORCE,
WOULD HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO
PURSUE I.S.I.S. OR ITS
SISTER-BROTHER GROUPS THROUGHOUT
THE REGION.
SO THERE ISN'T A GEOGRAPHICAL
RESTRICTION.
SO IT'S FACING CRITICISM FROM
BOTH SIDES PRRKS BOTH DEMOCRATS
WHO WANTED MORE LIMITED AND RVPS
WHO WANT THIS LARGE MANDATE.
JUDY, I JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND
WHERE THIS FITS IN, IN TERMS OF
HOW WE DEFINE WHAT THE OBJECTIVE
IS.
I MEAN, HOW WILL WE KNOW WHEN
WE'VE WON?
I MEAN, FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS,
IT'S BEEN THE DREAM OF A
CALIPHATE IN THAT AREA, OF A
MUSLIM CALIPHATE TO OUT THAT
AREA.
AND WE'RE NOT GOING TO END THAT
DREAM.
WE MIGHT WITH THIS LATEST IT
REGULATION, WE CAN CONTROL IT,
WE CAN DEBASE IT, BUT WE'RE NOT
GOING TO TOTALLY ELIMINATE THAT.
I WELCOME THE DEBATE.
I WANT TO HEAR EVERYBODY BE
HEARD ON THIS BECAUSE REALLY
IT'S AN INSOLVABLE MYSTERY NOW.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE SAYING
NOBODY HAS THE CORRECT FORMULA?
>> WELL, I THINK THERE IS A
NATIONAL CONSENSUS WE DON'T WANT
TO SEND GROUND TROOPS.
WE NEED TO DEGRADE I.S.I.S., A
NATIONAL CONSENSUS ABOUT THAT.
I WANT TO SEE LEADERSHIP FULLY
IN ON THE GOAL, NOT ONE FOOT,
ONE OUT.
THIS WILL ADMINISTRATION, WE GO
IN, WE DON'T GO IN, WE DECLARE D
LINES.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF SEESAW
ACTION.
IF I.S.I.S. IS WORTH GOING
AFTER, IT'S WORTH GOING AFTER.
I DON'T THINK ANYBODY CAN KNOW
WHAT THE WORLD WILL INVOLVED IN
THE YEARS COMING FORWARD BUT
THERE'S NO ONE LIKE I.S.I.S.
BEFORE.
THE ASSAD WASN'T, YASSER ARAFAT
WASN'T, THIS IS SOMETHING MORE
DIFFERENT AND THREATENING.>> THS
INVOLVED HERE.
THE UNWILLINGNESS TO TAKE A
STAND AND TO BE HEARD AND TO
VOTE.
THE LAST TIME THE CONGRESS DID
THIS, YOU RECALL, WAS 2002, WHEN
THEY GAVE UP THE AUTHORITY TO
PRESIDENT BUSH TO GO INTO AND
INVADE AND OKAY PAY IRAQ.
AND THE DEMOCRATS WHO VOTED FOR
THAT, HILLARY CLINTON, JOHN
EDWARDS, JOE BIDEN, CHRIS DODD,
BASICALLY KILLED THEIR
PRESIDENTIAL CHANCES, AND THAT
GAVE THE OPENING FOR BARACK
OBAMA.
SO BE MINDFUL OF THIS -- IN
1964, THE CONGRESS, 535 PEOPLE,
TWO, WIN MORRIS OF OREGON AND
EARNEST GREENING OF ALASKA WERE
THE ONLY ONES TO VOTED ON THE
GULF OF TONKA RESOLUTION WHICH
LED TO 550,000 AMERICANS IN
VEEVMENT.
SO THERE IS SOME HISTORY OF THIS
PRESIDENT AND UNDERSTANDABLY
SOME POLITICAL WARINESS.
>> Woodruff: TWO THINGS --
ONE, CONGRESS WRESTLING WITH THE
IMMIGRATION EXECUTIVE ORDER,
TIED UP IN THE DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY IN A TIME
WHEN YOU THINK THE COUNTRY WOULD
BE FOCUSED ON HOMELAND SECURITY.
REPUBLICANS ARE POINTING FINGERS
AT THE DEMOCRATS SAYING THEY'RE
HOLDING THIS UP, BUT REPUBLICANS
AREN'T AGREEING WITH EACH OTHER
ON WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT IN THE
HOUSE.
>> AND REPUBLICANS RUN THE
CONGRESS SO THEY GET ULTIMATELY
RESPONSIBILITY.
THIS IS TURNING FROM A COMEDY TO
A FARCE TO A TRAVESTY.
WHY HAVE THEY STARTED THEIR
REIGN IN THE MAJORITY OF BOTH
HOUSES WITH SOMETHING THEY'RE
BOUND TO LOSE? THEY STARTED WITE
THE HOUSE, THE SENATE, EVEN THE
REPUBLICAN SIDE CAN'T GET
TOGETHER, AND THEN IN THE
ATMOSPHERE OF THE PAST THREE OR
FOUR YEARS IN WHICH SHUTTING
DOWN THE GOVERNMENT HAS TURNED
INTO A CODE WORD FOR
DYSFUNCTION.
SO WHY DO YOU WANT TO WALK INTO
SOMETHING BADLY YOU'RE NOT DOING
WELL?
JUST AS A QUESTION OF
LEADERSHIP, NOT EVEN IDEOLOGY,
JUST COMPETENT LEADERSHIP, I
DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY THEY'RE
LEER.
>> I AGREE WITH DAVID.
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL,"
SCORCHING EDITORIAL THIS WEEK OF
THE REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP IN ITS
FIRST MONTH NOT FLYING WELL AND
DIVIDING THEMSELVES RATHER THAN
DEMOCRATS.
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
EDITORIAL PAGE ATTACKING
REPUBLICANS THIS IS LIKE
ROMANO GOING AFTER THE POPE.
THIS IS NOT WHERE YOU EXPECT TO
TAKE INCOMING CRITICISM, SO I
THINK THEY WILL HAVE TO BACK
DOWN.
THE HOUSE HAS DONE WHAT IT DOES,
IT PASSES SIMILAR POLK
LEGISLATION GOING NOWHERE.
57 TIMES THEY REPEALED OBAMA
CAIMPLET THAT'S WHAT THEY DID IN
THIS CASE.
THEY SENT IT TO THE SENATE, AND
IT'S GOING TO DIE THERE.
IT'S ON THE REPUBLICAN'S
DOORSTEP.
>> Woodruff: ONE LAST THING TO
MAKE TIME FOR.
THIS IS A TUMULTUOUS AND IN MANY
WAYS BAD WEEK FOR THE MEDIA.
BRIAN WILLIAMS SUSPENDED AT NBC
NEWS, THE DEATH OF DAVID CARR,
BOB SIMON WITH CBS, AND THE NEWS
FROM JON STEWART.
DAVID, ON THE BRIAN WILLIAMS
QUESTION, WHAT I'M CURIOUS TO
KNOW IS DOES THAT REFLECT ON
EVERYONE IN THE MEDIA?
HOW DOES THE MEDIA COME OUT OF
THIS EPISODE?
>> I THINK IT SPEAKS TO A COUPLE
OF TRUTHS.
ONE IS NO AMOUNT OF PUBLIC
SUCCESS IS SYOU CAN HAVE ALL THS
IN THE WORLD, BE WHERE BRIAN
WILLIAMS WAS AT THE TIPPY TOP,
PUBLIC'S FAME IS STILL EVER
THETY AND STILL LEAVES YOU
HUNGRY AND YOU STILL WANT TO
BRAG A LITTLE MORE ON THE HOPE
YOU WILL GET WHAT YOU WANT WHICH
IS SOME SORT OF ADULATION THAT
WILL SATISFY YOU AND THAT NEVER
COMES, SO IT LEAVES YOU HUNGRIER
ANDER, AND THAT'S WHAT WE
SAW WITH BRIAN WILLIAMS, SOMEONE
WHO WANTED TO BE SEEN A LITTLE
COOLER AND MADE UP SOME STUFF.
I THINK THE REACTION IS WAY OUT
OF PROPORTION TO WHAT HE DID AND
I THINK WE SHOULD CULTIVATE A
CAPACITY OF FORGIVENESS FOR WHAT
HE DID AND I HOPE HE CONTINUES
HIS JOB.
QUICKLY ON MY COLLEAGUE DAVID
CARR WHOM I WAS NOT CLOSE WITH
AT ALL.
FIRST ACT OF HIS LIFE, A
DRUG-RIDDLED LIFE, SECOND ACT,
ENCOURAGING TO BE YOURSELF.
HE HAD A MAJORLY LARGE
PERSONALITY WHICH HE NEVER
CHECKED AND GLOWED IN HIS PROSE
AND PRESENCE.
>> DAVID CARR WAS THE ANTIQUE
"NEW YORK TIMES" MAN.
IF THE "NEW YORK TIMES" IS THE
GUY WHO WENT TO THE BEST
BOARDING SCHOOLS, KNOWS THE BEST
WINES AND HAS TWO LAST NAMES --
>> TALKING ABOUT ME.
DAVID.
DAVID CARR WAS LARGE THAN LIFE,
TOTALLY AUTHENTIC, GREAT
REPORTER, ENFLINCHINGLY HONEST
AND INCREDIBLY THOUGHTFUL OF
EVERYBODY HE CAME ACROSS,
WHETHER A WAITRESS OR YOUNGEST
INTERN.
HE WAS A WONDERFUL, WONDERFUL
PERSON IN ADDITION TO BEING THIS
LARGER THAN LIFE CHARACTER.
BRIAN WILLIAMS, YES,
SELF-INFLICTED, JUDY, BUT THIS
IS A GOOD AND DECENT MAN AND THE
PEOPLE IN A RUSH TO TAP DANCE ON
HIS GRAVE THAT PROVIDE THE
GALLOWS AND THE ROPE TO HANG
HIM, IT JUST REALLY IS
DISTURBING AND UNSEEMLY.
>> I DON'T THINK WE'VE SEEN A
WEEK LIKE THIS ONE IN A LONG
TIME.
MARK SHIELDS, DAVID BROOKS,
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, OUR
"NEWSHOUR SHARES" OF THE DAY.
SOMETHING WE SAW WE THOUGHT
MIGHT BE OF INTEREST TO YOU,
TONIGHT'S WAS SPARKED BY YOUR
VIEWER E-MAILS.
ON WEDNESDAY WE BROUGHT YOU SOME
WINTER PHOTOS FROM THE "BANGOR
MAINE DAILY NEWS," BUT I
MISPRONOUNCED THE TOWN NAME AS
"BANGER."
AS WE LEARNED FROM YOUR E-MAILS,
THIS IS A LONGSTANDING PROBLEM
FOR THE CITY, SO MUCH SO, THAT A
LOCAL MARKETING FIRM WENT ON
YOUTUBE TO CORRECT IT.
WE SAW THE VIDEO, TO THE TUNE OF
"WE ARE THE WORLD" AND HAD TO
SHARE.
IN EVERY
REGION'S LIVES
WHEN WE MUST COME TOGETHER IN
SONG
THERE ARE PEOPLE
ACROSS THIS U.S.A.
AND THEY ALL SAY THE NAME OF
OUR CITY WRONG
WE ARE BANGOR
WE ARE NOT BANGER
AND WHEN YOU MISBROWN MISPRONR
NAME IT CAUSES ANGER
OUR CITY IS THE STAR ON THE
EDGE OF NIGHT
SO THE LEAST YOU FOLKS COULD
DO IS SAY IT RIGHT
>> Woodruff: DULY CHASTISED.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
OREGON'S DEMOCRATIC GOVERNOR
JOHN KITZHABER ANNOUNCED HE'S
RESIGNING, OVER ALLEGED
INFLUENCE PEDDLING BY HIS
FIANCEE.
AND IRAQI TROOPS REPULSED AN
"ISLAMIC STATE" ATTACK AT A BASE
WHERE 400 U.S. TROOPS ARE
TRAINING GOVERNMENT FORCES.
AND A REMINDER ABOUT SOME
UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM OUR PBS
COLLEAGUES.
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> Ifill: IS THERE ROOM FOR
MIDDLE GROUND ANYWHERE?
IN UKRAINE'S SHAKY CEASE FIRE?
IN THE SEARCH FOR A WAY TO
DEFEAT ISIS?
IN THE CONGRESSIONAL DEBATE OVER
FUNDING HOMELAND SECURITY?
OR ON THE 2016 CAMPAIGN TRAIL?
MAYBE NOT, BUT WE GO IN SEARCH
OF IT ANYWAY ON TONIGHT'S
"WASHINGTON WEEK."
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SATURDAY, COLORADO'S
DECISION TO LEGALIZE MARIJUANA
HAS ANGERED SOME OF IT'S
NEIGHBORS.
NOW THEY'RE SUING.
DAM AWARD IS THE SHERIFF OF
THIS COUNTY IN NEBRASKA BY THE
STATE LINE WITH COLORADO.
SHERIFF HAYWARD SAID HIS WORK
HAS NOT BEEN THE SAME SINCE
COLORADO LEGALIZED RECREATIONAL
MARIJUANA.
>> KEEP IT THERE.
IT'S STILL LEGAL HERE.
WE DON'T HAVE A CHOICE.
WE HAVE TO ENFORCE THE LAW.
>> THE SHERIFF SAID HE ARRESTED
PEOPLE CARRYING MARIJUANA FROM
COLORADO BACK ACROSS THE BORDER.
>> WE'RE A SMALL DEPARTMENT.
IF THEY RUN ACROSS SOMEONE, THEY
CALL MANY SOMEONE OUT, WE HAVE
TO PAY OVERTIME --
>> DRIVERS, REGISTRATION.
REGARDLESS WHERE THE PERSON
IS FROM, THE COUNTY PICKS UP THE
BILL FOR HOUSING AND MEDICAL
TREATMENT FOR THOSE IN CUSTODY
AND THE COST OF HIRING A PUBLIC
DEFENDER.
>> Woodruff: TUNE IN FOR THE
FULL REPORT ON SATURDAY'S PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF, HAVE A GREAT
WEEKEND, AND DON'T FORGET,
TOMORROW IS VALENTINE'S DAY!
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.